Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop thehighest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledgecreation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities,social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would beable to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such asenergy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientificknowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness,humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular andextra-curricular activities on campus.

The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life longprocess of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmesfocus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creativeinquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objectiveMind.

The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) CreditSystem and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a dulyconstituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chairedby Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics-PG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a highstandard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Withinthis broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes caninclude additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. Theseacademic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriatemodifications/ improvements as and when necessary.

The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines:

Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least 70.


The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation, declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the Senate.

3. Registration
[Back to index]

Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late registration.

3.1 Provisional Registration
A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be regularized.

3.2 Late Registration
If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. Chairman Senate may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.

3.3 Adding and Dropping of Courses
A student may add or drop course(s) with approval ofthe Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.

3.4 Withdrawing from a Course
After the last date of add-drop, a student will have theoption of withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically withinfour weeks from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. Thewithdrawn course will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.

3.5 Cancellation of Semester Registration
Absence for a period of four or more weeksDuring a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from allthe courses in that semester.

3.6 Summer Course Registration
​A department may offer summer courses to enable thestudents to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run duringsummer provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offeredon approval of the Dean.

4.2 Evaluation
[Back to index]

The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and projects.

The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each subject in each semester.Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits) must have at least one examination.The total weightage of examination component (three examinations for a 14 week long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.

5. Grading System
[Back to index]

5.1 Letter Grades
[Back to index]

5.1 Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course. Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1. In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete, Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule.

Table 5.1 Letter grade and its equivalent grade points

A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their absence. Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the following categories:

Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period of the missed quiz/exam.Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital before they proceed for such consultation.Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital.A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly endorsed by the parent/guardian.

A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup / supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance.
Regulations for Undergraduate Programmes
[Back to index]

9. Undergraduate Programs
[Back to index]

IIT Jodhpur currently offers Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) programs, and capability linked opportunities for undergraduate students through Minor/Interdisciplinary Area Specialization leading to M.Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Department Area Specialization leading to M.Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M.Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in Product Realization (through Industrial Translation).

10. Undergraduate Admissions
[Back to index]

10.1 B.Tech. Programmes
[Back to index] 10.1.1 General Admissions

Admissions to the B.Tech. Programmes are made once a year in July through the all-India level Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted by IITs. The procedures and other requirements for admission are specified in the JEE Information Brochure brought out every year.

10.1.2 Cultural Exchange Programmes

Admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the Cultural Exchange Fellowship Program of the Government of India, administered by Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR), New Delhi. Persons interested in these Programs are required to apply through the Indian High Commission/Embassy in their respective countries.

10.1.3 Change/Enhancement of Program

A student already admitted to a B.Tech. programme may switch to another department through branch change. A student can enhance his/her programme to a Minor/Interdisciplinary Area Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Major/Department Area Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship, Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M. Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in Product Realization (through Industrial Translation). The rules governing these changes are given in Section 18 (branch change) and Section 11.2 (for all others).

10.2 Reservation Policy
[Back to index]

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.

10.3 Student Exchange Programme
[Back to index]

Student Exchange Program provides for a one/two-semester visit by students between the two academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. The visiting student must be a full-time student enrolled in a degree program in their Home Institution. The exchange program is open to full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each Home Institution. It will be executed as per the pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU) between the institutions.

Selection of students under such program will be made by the DUGC after assessing the preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework/research at the Host Institution and the relevance of the planned coursework/research to the enrolled degree program. A visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU).

Under exchange program, a student of IIT Jodhpur can register at another academic institution in India or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to 20 credits per semester in lieu of the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an MoU.

On return, the student may apply to DUGC for waiver of credits from her/his program requirements which s/he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the visited academic institution as an exchange student. With the application, the student must submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her/him at the visited academic institution as an exchange student and other documents/material that the concerned DUGC may require for evaluation. The DUGC will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her/his programme at IIT Jodhpur. DUGC will submit its recommendations to course equivalence committee for its approval. Moreover,

The credits/grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of his/her transcripts.
IIT Jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester.
The CGPA calculation based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone is to be considered for award of prizes.
Academic Regulations
10.4 Visiting Students
[Back to index]

A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities.

A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean (Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and nationality.

Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to regular students of the Institute.

10.5 Cancellation of Admission
[Back to index]

Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission.

10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements
[Back to index]

Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes.

11. Curriculum and Academic Requirements
[Back to index]

11.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for UG Programmes
[Back to index]

The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 11.1. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spend by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

Table 11.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment.

Welcome to the Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. The department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. Our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and R&D for solving problems of national interest.

Vision
To be among the top 10 departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of Computer Science and Engineering in the country in the next 3 years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next 5 years. Some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.



Mission
Our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.

(M1) Achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subjects for innovative discoveries.
(M2) Develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. The collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc.
(M3) Develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.
(M4) Embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional Computer Science teaching and learning. Be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid CSE education.
(M5) Define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants/ consultancies, and collaborative projects. Develop Start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at IIT Jodhpur.
(M6) Dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation.
(M7) Provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society.
Welcome To The Department of Materials Engineering
The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur was established in 2017, and the Department is committed to high-quality education and research in the broad area of Materials Engineering. The Department continuously strives for excellence in teaching and research through innovative pedagogy and curriculum, by undertaking interdisciplinary projects, and through active collaborations with industries, R&D labs, and academia. By enabling the students to think independently and equipping them with relevant skill sets, our goal is to encourage the graduates to innovate and address present-day materials challenges to meet the needs of the country.

At present, the Department offers B.Tech., M.Tech., and Ph.D. programs. The Department's teaching and research activities cover four major streams- structural materials, functional materials, computational materials engineering, and process metallurgy. From structural materials to semiconductors, we attempt to understand the processing, composition and structure, properties, and performance of materials for deriving novel, effective, and sustainable alternatives. Currently, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts such as smart materials, additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence and machine learning, sensor materials, etc., as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring Materials Engineering knowledge.



Welcome to the Department of Mechanical Engineering
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is devoted to quality engineering education and pursuits the excellence in research. It is dedicated to preparing students to face the emerging challenges faced by society. The vision of the Department is to translate its research and to innovate in pedagogy to enable ignited young minds to find technological solutions for upcoming challenges. The Department offers B. Tech. M. Tech. and Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering within three major domains of Thermofluids, Design, and Smart Manufacturing. The students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of things (IoT), Smart Healthcare, and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).

At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are educated in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of the current activities of the Department. Faculty members are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, nanomaterials, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermo-fluids, fluid-structure interaction, etc. to name a few. Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, Smart scientific computing techniques, high-performance computing, applications of artificial intelligence, machine learning algorithms, sensors, and IoT as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring mechanical engineering know-how. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the Department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills.

The department has active collaborations with AIIMS Jodhpur, General Electric, Thermax, DRDO, ISRO, TCS Innovation Lab, TVS Motor Company to name a few. The department has been attracting various sponsored projects from R&D organizations since its inception.
echnology Tracks
Smart Manufacturing and Industry 4.0
Multiscale Manufacturing
Processing of Novel Materials
"iitj_about": """
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur established in 2008 is one of the new generation
IITs set up by the Government of India. Located in Rajasthan IIT Jodhpur is committed to
providing world-class education in engineering science and technology. The institute
envisions becoming a globally recognized center for education research and innovation.
IIT Jodhpur offers undergraduate programs including BTech in Computer Science Engineering
Electrical Engineering Mechanical Engineering Civil Engineering Chemical Engineering
and Bioscience Bioengineering. The institute offers postgraduate programs including
MTech MSc MBA and PhD across various disciplines. The campus spans over 800 acres in
Karwar Jodhpur and features modern laboratories research centers hostels sports
facilities and central library. The institute fosters interdisciplinary research and
encourages collaboration between departments. IIT Jodhpur is committed to academic
excellence research innovation and societal impact. The faculty comprises distinguished
researchers and academicians from top universities around the world.
""",

"iitj_cse_department": """
The Department of Computer Science and Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is one of the premier
departments of the institute. The department offers BTech MTech and PhD programs in
computer science and engineering. Research areas include artificial intelligence machine
learning deep learning natural language processing computer vision data science
algorithms theory of computation distributed systems cybersecurity and human-computer
interaction. The department has state-of-the-art computing laboratories equipped with
high-performance GPU clusters for deep learning and AI research. Faculty members have
published papers in top-tier venues such as NeurIPS ICML ACL CVPR ICCV and IEEE
transactions. The BTech curriculum covers core subjects like data structures algorithms
operating systems database management systems computer networks and software engineering.
Students are encouraged to participate in research projects internships and coding
competitions. The department regularly organizes seminars workshops and conferences
to foster academic exchange. Graduate students work on cutting-edge research problems
in collaboration with industry partners and international institutions. The PhD program
requires students to complete coursework pass comprehensive examination and submit
thesis based on original research contributions.
""",

"iitj_electrical_dept": """
The Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur offers programs at BTech MTech
and PhD levels. The department specializes in power systems power electronics control
systems signal processing VLSI design embedded systems communication engineering and
renewable energy. Research focuses on smart grids solar energy systems electric vehicles
digital signal processing wireless communications and semiconductor devices. The department
has well-equipped laboratories for electronics power systems and communications experiments.
Faculty members collaborate with industry and government organizations on funded research
projects. Students have access to simulation tools like MATLAB Simulink PSPICE and HFSS.
MTech students specialize in power electronics or communication systems while PhD scholars
contribute to fundamental and applied research.
""",

"iitj_mechanical_dept": """
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur provides education in thermal
sciences fluid mechanics solid mechanics manufacturing robotics and design. The BTech
program covers engineering mechanics thermodynamics machine design manufacturing
processes heat transfer and fluid dynamics. Research areas include computational fluid
dynamics additive manufacturing biomechanics tribology and renewable energy systems.
Faculty members conduct research funded by SERB DST and industry sponsors. Students learn
to use CAD tools like SOLIDWORKS ANSYS and CATIA. Interdisciplinary research projects
connect mechanical engineering with materials science biomedical engineering and
artificial intelligence.
""",

"iitj_academic_regulations": """
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS IIT JODHPUR.
Admission to the BTech program at IIT Jodhpur is through the Joint Entrance Examination
Advanced conducted by IITs. Students are admitted based on JEE Advanced rank and choices
filled in the Joint Seat Allocation Authority process. The BTech program spans eight
semesters over four years. Each semester consists of approximately eighteen weeks of
instruction followed by end-semester examinations. The academic calendar is divided into
odd semester from July to November and even semester from January to May.
The institute follows a credit-based system. Each course is assigned credits based on
contact hours per week. The minimum credit requirement for BTech graduation is one hundred
sixty credits. The institute follows ten-point grading system with grades Outstanding
Excellent Very Good Good Above Average Average Pass and Fail.
Students are required to maintain minimum attendance of seventy-five percent in each
course. Students with attendance below seventy-five percent will not be permitted to
appear in the end-semester examination of that course. Medical certificates may be
considered for condonation of attendance shortage.
Each course has evaluation components including mid-semester examination carrying thirty
percent weightage end-semester examination carrying forty percent weightage and quizzes
assignments carrying thirty percent weightage. Students must carry identity cards to
all examinations.
In the final year BTech students complete a major project or dissertation spanning two
semesters carrying twenty credits. Students are assigned faculty supervisor and must
submit periodic progress reports. Students must maintain minimum CGPA of five point zero
to continue in BTech program. Students with CGPA below minimum will be placed on academic
probation. Students are encouraged to undertake research internships during summer
vacations through programs like SRFP MITACS and DAAD.
""",

"iitj_phd_regulations": """
REGULATIONS FOR PhD PROGRAM IIT JODHPUR.
Candidates with Master degree in relevant field with minimum CGPA of six point five are
eligible for admission to PhD program. Candidates with BTech degree with outstanding
academic record with CGPA eight or above may be considered for direct PhD admission.
Admission is through written test and interview conducted by respective department.
PhD scholars at IIT Jodhpur are classified as full-time scholars committed to research
at the institute receiving institute fellowship and part-time scholars who are working
professionals pursuing PhD while employed elsewhere and sponsored scholars sponsored by
their employer organization.
Full-time PhD scholars receive monthly fellowship as per MHRD norms. Fellowship for
first two years is at junior research fellow rate and subsequently at senior research
fellow rate. Scholars are entitled to contingency grants for purchasing books software
and travel support for conference participation.
PhD scholars are required to complete minimum twenty-four credits of coursework in
first two semesters. Scholars must maintain minimum CGPA of seven point zero in coursework.
After completing required coursework PhD scholars must appear for comprehensive examination
testing understanding of research area and allied subjects. Only scholars who pass
comprehensive examination are permitted to continue with full-time research and thesis.
PhD scholars must submit thesis embodying results of original research. Thesis is evaluated
by external examiners from India and abroad. After receiving satisfactory reports scholar
appears for open thesis defense. Minimum duration for full-time PhD program is three years.
PhD scholars are required to publish research findings in peer-reviewed journals and
conferences. It is mandatory to have at least one research paper published or accepted
in reputed journal before submitting thesis.
""",

"iitj_research_centers": """
IIT Jodhpur has established centers of excellence to promote interdisciplinary research
and innovation bringing together faculty research scholars and students from multiple
departments.
The Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science focuses on developing AI and
machine learning solutions for societal challenges. Research areas include healthcare AI
agricultural AI natural language processing for Indian languages computer vision and
reinforcement learning. The center collaborates with hospitals agricultural research
institutes and technology companies. Projects include AI-based crop disease detection
medical image analysis and automated text summarization. PhD scholars and MTech students
work on cutting-edge AI problems.
The Center for Sustainable Energy conducts research on renewable energy technologies
including solar photovoltaics wind energy energy storage and smart grids. The center
has solar energy testing facility and works with Rajasthan renewable energy corporation.
Research projects address energy access in rural areas and development of low-cost energy
storage systems.
Given IIT Jodhpur location in Thar Desert region the Center for Desert Research studies
desert ecosystems water resources sand dunes and sustainable architecture. Research themes
include water harvesting drought-resistant agriculture heritage conservation in desert
environments and traditional knowledge systems of desert communities.
The department of bioscience and bioengineering conducts research on drug delivery systems
biomaterials tissue engineering proteomics genomics and computational biology. Faculty
collaborate with AIIMS Jodhpur and pharmaceutical companies on translational research.
""",

"iitj_faculty_profiles": """
Professor Anand Mishra completed PhD from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur.
His research interests include document image analysis scene text recognition computer
vision and deep learning. He has published research papers at CVPR ICCV ECCV and ICDAR.
He has received research grants from SERB and has supervised multiple PhD students.
He teaches courses on machine learning computer vision and image processing.
Associate Professor Sumit Bhatia received PhD from Pennsylvania State University.
His research focuses on natural language processing text mining information retrieval
and knowledge graphs. He has worked at IBM Research bringing industry research experience
to the department. He teaches courses on natural language processing and data mining.
His research is funded by government and industry grants.
Assistant Professor Richa Singh specializes in biometrics face recognition soft biometrics
and multimedia forensics. She has published extensively in IEEE transactions and computer
vision conferences. She teaches courses on pattern recognition and biometrics. Her lab
works on developing robust biometric systems for security applications.
Professor Santanu Chaudhury is distinguished researcher in computer vision and pattern
recognition. His research covers video surveillance activity recognition and cultural
heritage digitization. Dr Santosh Veda completed PhD from IIT Bombay. His research covers
power electronics electric drives and renewable energy integration.
Dr Sumantra Dutta Roy received PhD from IIT Delhi. His research interests include signal
processing image processing and audio signal analysis. He has published papers in IEEE
Signal Processing transactions and related journals.
""",

"iitj_course_syllabi": """
CS201 Data Structures and Algorithms covers algorithm analysis including Big-O notation
time complexity space complexity recurrence relations and Master theorem. Topics include
arrays linked lists stacks queues binary trees binary search trees AVL trees red-black
trees heaps priority queues tree traversals graph representations breadth-first search
depth-first search topological sort shortest path algorithms minimum spanning trees divide
and conquer dynamic programming greedy algorithms backtracking and string matching.
CS301 Machine Learning introduces supervised unsupervised and reinforcement learning.
Topics include linear regression logistic regression regularization gradient descent
optimization support vector machines kernel methods decision trees random forests
ensemble methods boosting algorithms artificial neural networks backpropagation
convolutional neural networks recurrent neural networks attention mechanisms transformer
architecture clustering algorithms dimensionality reduction principal component analysis
generative models text preprocessing word embeddings Word2Vec GloVe language models
and text classification.
EE201 Signals and Systems covers continuous-time signals LTI systems impulse response
convolution Fourier series Fourier transform frequency response Laplace transform transfer
functions system stability sampling theorem Z-transform discrete-time Fourier transform
and digital filter design.
MA101 Mathematics covers calculus including limits continuity differentiability mean value
theorems Taylor series integration techniques and improper integrals. Linear algebra
includes matrices determinants systems of linear equations eigenvalues eigenvectors
diagonalization and vector spaces. Multivariable calculus includes partial derivatives
gradient divergence curl multiple integrals and vector calculus theorems.
""",

"iitj_newsletter_2024": """
IIT Jodhpur felicitated outstanding researchers at Annual Research Day. Professor Anand
Kumar from Department of Computer Science received Best Research Paper award for work on
graph neural networks. Dr Priya Sharma from Bioscience received recognition for research
on nanomedicine drug delivery systems.
The institute secured research funding worth over fifty crore rupees. Projects include
DST-funded initiative on AI for healthcare diagnostics DRDO project on advanced materials
for defense applications and MoE-funded project on educational technology for rural India.
Students from IIT Jodhpur performed brilliantly in national and international competitions.
The team from Computer Science department won the Inter-IIT Tech Meet programming contest.
BTech students won the Smart India Hackathon for project on water quality monitoring using
IoT and machine learning.
The placement season saw outstanding results with top companies including Google Microsoft
Amazon Goldman Sachs McKinsey and ITC recruiting from IIT Jodhpur. Several students opted
for higher studies at premier universities including MIT Stanford Carnegie Mellon and ETH Zurich.
IIT Jodhpur launched new BTech program in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science to meet
growing demand for AI professionals. The program covers machine learning deep learning
computer vision natural language processing and data engineering. A new interdisciplinary
MTech program in Energy Systems has also been introduced.
IIT Jodhpur signed MoUs with international universities including University of Twente in
Netherlands Queensland University of Technology in Australia and University of Illinois at
Chicago in USA. These agreements facilitate student faculty exchange programs joint research
projects and joint degree programs.
Researchers at IIT Jodhpur are developing machine learning algorithms for early detection
of diseases from medical images focusing on diabetic retinopathy skin cancer and
tuberculosis using convolutional neural networks in collaboration with AIIMS Jodhpur.
A research group in CSE department is working on NLP tools for Hindi and Rajasthani
languages building chatbots and virtual assistants for government service delivery.
""",

"iitj_research_publications": """
Researchers from Department of Computer Science IIT Jodhpur published work on
attention-based neural machine translation for low-resource Indian languages in ACL 2024.
The paper presents transformer model trained with data augmentation and transfer learning
for Hindi-English and Rajasthani-Hindi translation showing improvements over baseline models.
Researchers from CAIDS IIT Jodhpur published work on efficient deep learning for real-time
object detection on edge devices in IEEE Transactions 2024. They propose knowledge
distillation framework combined with structured pruning and quantization to compress
large object detection models enabling real-time processing on embedded platforms.
PhD scholars and faculty from CSE IIT Jodhpur published work on graph neural networks
for citation network analysis and academic recommendation in EMNLP 2024. They model
citation network as heterogeneous graph and apply graph neural networks to learn
representations of papers authors and venues capturing semantic similarity and citation
patterns. PhD students contributed to dataset collection and annotation.
Researchers from Electrical Engineering IIT Jodhpur published work on solar irradiance
forecasting using deep learning for desert regions in Solar Energy Journal 2024. They
develop hybrid deep learning model combining convolutional and recurrent neural networks
to forecast solar irradiance at hourly and daily time scales trained on meteorological
data from IIT Jodhpur weather station.
Bioscience Department IIT Jodhpur published work on biodegradable polymer nanoparticles
for targeted cancer drug delivery in Biomaterials 2024. They synthesize biodegradable
polymer nanoparticles for targeted delivery of anticancer drugs demonstrating enhanced
cellular uptake and tumor growth inhibition compared to free drug administration.
""",

"iitj_student_activities": """
The programming club at IIT Jodhpur organizes competitive programming contests workshops
on algorithms and training sessions for platforms like Codeforces LeetCode and CodeChef.
The club prepares students for ACM-ICPC Google Code Jam and other coding competitions.
Regular practice sessions help students develop problem-solving skills and algorithmic
thinking.
The robotics club designs and builds robots for competitions like ABU Robocon and national
robotics challenges. Members learn about microcontrollers sensors actuators computer vision
and control systems. The club has won national awards in various robotics competitions.
The AI and machine learning club focuses on practical applications of artificial intelligence.
Members organize paper reading sessions implement research papers participate in Kaggle
competitions and build AI-powered projects. The club provides a platform for students
interested in AI research to collaborate and learn from each other.
The Entrepreneurship Cell promotes entrepreneurial culture among students organizing startup
competitions entrepreneurship workshops and speaker sessions by successful entrepreneurs
and investors. The cell helps student entrepreneurs connect with mentors incubators and
investors. Several startups have been founded by IIT Jodhpur alumni in areas including
edtech healthtech agritech and clean energy.
The National Service Scheme unit undertakes community service including teaching in rural
schools organizing health camps blood donation drives and environmental awareness campaigns.
NSS volunteers work in villages around Jodhpur to improve literacy and health outcomes.
""",

"iitj_hostel_academic_life": """
IIT Jodhpur provides on-campus hostel accommodation to all students with separate hostels
for boys and girls. Hostels are equipped with common rooms study halls indoor games
facilities and WiFi connectivity. Each hostel has mess facility providing nutritious meals.
The hostel administration includes warden and resident tutors who assist students.
The institute provides academic support through tutorial sessions doubt clearing classes
and mentorship programs. Senior students serve as peer tutors to help juniors. Faculty
advisors meet regularly with students to monitor academic progress and provide guidance.
The central library has vast collection of books journals and digital resources. Students
have access to databases like IEEE Xplore ACM Digital Library JSTOR and ScienceDirect.
The library has dedicated reading rooms group study areas and computer terminals.
The institute has hospital with resident doctors and medical staff providing outpatient
consultations basic diagnostic services and first aid. The counseling center provides
mental health support and psychological counseling to students dealing with academic
stress homesickness and personal challenges.
Examinations are conducted as per academic calendar. The mid-semester examination is held
in the middle of the semester and end-semester examination at the conclusion. Continuous
assessment includes quizzes assignments and laboratory work.
""",

"iitj_admissions": """
Admission to BTech program at IIT Jodhpur is conducted through Joint Seat Allocation
Authority process based on JEE Advanced ranks. IIT Jodhpur offers BTech programs in
Computer Science Engineering Electrical Engineering Mechanical Engineering Civil Engineering
Chemical Engineering Bioscience Bioengineering and Artificial Intelligence Data Science.
MTech admissions are based on GATE scores. Candidates with valid GATE score can apply for
MTech programs. Shortlisted candidates are called for personal interview. Sponsored
candidates from industry and government organizations may also be admitted.
PhD admissions are held twice a year in December-January for even semester and June-July
for odd semester. Candidates apply through online portal and are shortlisted based on
academic qualifications and research aptitude. Shortlisted candidates appear for written
test followed by personal interview conducted by department. Successful candidates are
offered fellowship as per government norms.
Admission to MSc programs in Physics Chemistry and Mathematics is through JAM scores.
The MBA program at IIT Jodhpur School of Management and Entrepreneurship admits students
based on CAT scores. The program focuses on technology management entrepreneurship and
data analytics. International students can apply through DASA scheme for BTech programs
or directly for postgraduate programs.
"""
Fluid Thermal System Design
Multiphase Flows
Energy and Sustainability
Solid Mechanics and Design
Vibration and Acoustics
Robotics and Mobility Systems
Aerodynamics
Welcome to the Department of Mathematics
Mathematics, being the basis of many disciplines, is a subject that evolves with time and creates new theories to solve real-world challenging problems. Our department has been taking a leading role in developing new methods to model such situations that can be used in diverse areas of computer science, engineering, and basic sciences. The department has faculty with research interests in the areas of Algebra, Mathematical Physics, Scientific Computation, Numerical Analysis, Partial Differential Equations, Topological Dynamics, Low Dimensional Chaos, Dynamical Systems, Renormalization in Low-dimensional dynamics, Wavelet Analysis, Fractional Transform Theory, Image Processing, Financial Risk Analysis, Categorical Data Analysis, Reliability Theory, Applied Probability.

We are excited to offer high-quality programs at postgraduate level for students who wish to apply math to science or engineering such as a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences. We also offer an M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree program in Data and Computational Sciences and a Ph.D. Program with specialization in different areas of Mathematics to those who wish to earn a deeper understanding of pure and applied Mathematics.

The subject of Physics is inherently a natural science subject based on strong theoretical foundations and experimental findings. The subject closely intersects with almost all the branches of engineering and the current research activities of physics across the world made a huge impact on new, advanced, and emerging technologies. Keeping these facts into consideration, our Department is committed to imparting high-quality education based on a strong academic curriculum comprising elements of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and most importantly hands-on experiments. The graduates of the Department are expected to have deep insight into the domain of Physics together with a strong bent of mind to pursue cutting-edge research and translate it into technology.

We offer a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. Our 4 Year BS in Physics with specialization is a technology-oriented science program and offers specialization in physics-based emerging technology domains. The program also has the flexibility to convert into a 5 Year BS + M.Tech. dual degree course. At the postgraduate level, we have four-degree programs viz. M.Sc. (2 years), M.Sc.-M.Tech Dual Degree in Physics and Materials Engineering. The dual degree program also has additional two specializations namely Functional Materials and Computational Materials Engineering. Finally, our Ph.D. program empowers scholars to pursue research in various domains.

Research Areas
The department has a very good blend of highly qualified young and experienced faculty members in the areas of advanced physics. The department is also equipped with a number of thematic laboratories which enable the students to carry out high-end and impactful theoretical and applied research in the following focus areas:

Research Areas of physics department
Research Areas
High Energy Physics and Astrophysics

Theoretical research in domains; Flavour physics, Astrophysics, Particle physics, Cosmology, and Dark matter and Dark energy. Experimental research in flavor physics with the Belle II Experiment.

Quantum Physics

Open Quantum Systems, Theoretical and Experimental aspects of Quantum Optics & Quantum Information, Quantum Field Theory, Quantum Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Cosmology.

Condensed Matter and Plasma Physics Group

Experimental and Theoretical Research on Molecular electronics, Organic electronics, Cold Plasma Technologies and applications, Energy Storage, Solar cells, Light emitting diodes, Solar water splitting, Soft Matters, Statistical Physics, Computational Physics, Multiscale Modelling, Phase ordering dynamics, Glasses, Amorphous solids, Polymers and Solid Electrolyte materials, Physics of Living Matter, Active Matter Physics, Functional Materials, Materials Design and Engineering, Nanomagnetism and Multiferroics.

Optics and Photonics

Theoretical and Experimental Research in Nano Photonics, Light in disordered media, Ultrafast Optics, Nonlinear Optics, Topological Singularities, Specially Optical Fibers, Photonic sensors, Time Dynamic systems, Terahertz generation and application, Transient and Steady-state Spectroscopy, Bound state in the continuum, Disorder Photons and Light Matter Interaction and Ceramic materials for high energy laser applications.

Candidates interested in pursuing Ph.D., please go through the Research groups and visit the individual faculty's home pages. The application can be submitted with this link.

Infrastructure
The department is equipped with high-end research equipment which includes SQUID magnetometer, Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS), Raman Spectrometer, and Scanning Tunnelling Microscope (STM) besides a host of other advanced characterization equipment which is available at the Centre for Research & Development of Scientific Instruments (CRDSI).

Collaborations
The department is having close collaboration with a number of National and International agencies including DRDO, ISRO, DAE, CSIR, DST, and SERB. Department Faculties also have collaborations with various Institutes of National and International repute, namely TIFR, IIT Bombay, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT BHU, Central University of Rajasthan, University of Montreal, Canada, University of Warsaw Poland, Brookhaven National Laboratory USA, ETH Zurich Switzerland, IMEM Parma Italy, INFN Turino, Italy, CMU Pittsburgh USA, Belle II KEK Japan etc.
Welcome to the Department of Electrical Engineering
The Department of Electrical Engineering primarily focuses on imparting quality education and preparing students to face future technological challenges. The vision of the Department is to enhance the research environment and to innovate in pedagogy to address the challenges of socio-economic and human resource development.

The Department is committed to engage in high-quality research by Faculty Members and Students, and in the pursuit of excellence in teaching. The Department offers B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering with broad range of major and minor specializations and three state-of-the-art M.Tech. programs in Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT), Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), and Intelligent Communication Systems (ICS).

The Department also runs dual degree (M.Tech. + Ph.D.) programs in Intelligent Communication Systems, Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT) and Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) as well as Ph.D. program with a broad range of specializations covering detailed aspects of Microelectronics, Signal Processing, Communication, Microwave & Photonics, Power systems, Control systems etc. The Department is also starting a new Executive MTech Program in Intelligent VLSI Systems (for working professionals) from July 2022.

The prospective undergraduate and postgraduate students are encouraged to visit the Academic Programs (UG Program, PG Programs and Doctoral Programs) page of the Department to know more about the details of courses offered in the department.

To know more about the current research themes of the faculty members, the prospective students are encouraged to visit the Research Overview page of the Department. Technology Tracks currently pursued by the Department include emerging and challenging fields that culminate at the intersection of several traditional research areas.

Current Technology Tracks
Welcome to the Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
logo
The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales – from an individual to the community level. Consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. The Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, IIT Jodhpur  esatablished in January 2020. We started academics programs in the academic year 2020-2021. The department offers unique programs that incorporate and integrate the elements of conventional civil engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber-physical-systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains.

The focus areas of the department are :

Energy and Environment
Building Sciences, Safety, and Services
Applications of AI, IoT and CPS in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
Smart and Integrated Infrastructure
Urban Architecture and Planning
Construction Technology and Management
Transportation Engineering
Structural Engineering
Geotechnical Engineering
Water resources Engineering
Engineering Geology
Vision
"The Department strives to be an internationally renowned centre of excellence in education, research, and innovation with a major focus on sustainability and digitalization of infrastructure."

Missions
Develop unique courses in the field of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering through advanced UG and PG programs with a multidisciplinary perspective.
Establish high quality teaching and research facilities in the areas of smart, resilient, and sustainable infrastructure engineering to foster the needs of society.
Promote consilient research through application of AI/ML, cyber-physical-systems, digital twin and advanced visualization in the areas of Energy, Environment, Transportation, and Construction.
Promote innovative and entrepreneurial activities through intellectual property generation and transfer.
Nurture the potential of students to become future leaders in the Civil Engineering industry for leadership achievements, scientific breakthroughs and social welfare.
Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+ 
Vision & Mission of the Department
To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.   

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.

In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:

Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
One year Engineering Innovation opportunity


Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.

The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.

Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.
Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+ 
Vision & Mission of the Department
To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.   

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.

In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:

Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
One year Engineering Innovation opportunity


Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.

The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.

Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.
Welcome to Department of Chemistry & Head's Message
A warm welcome to the Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, which was established in 2015. Since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. Our department offers a variety of academic programs including M.Sc. (2 Years), M.Sc. (Chemistry)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) with Specialization, BS in Chemistry with Specialization (4 years), and Ph.D. programs. We also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate B.Tech. engineering students. The department offers Chemistry courses for 4-year Integrated B.Sc.-B.Ed. Program (ITEP), which is in alignment with NEP 2020 to support teacher preparation and foster professional development.

Besides teaching, the Department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. Our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. We have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. Our current faculty strength is 19 and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. The cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. In short IIT Jodhpur Chemistry department is where Chemistry meets Technology through Collaboration, Communication and Cooperation. I encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at IIT Jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. Thank you.
Welcome to the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering
The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2009 offers a B.Tech. program in Bioengineering, an M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree programs in Bioscience & Bioengineering. Our programs are uniquely designed to inspire innovations in biotechnology, engineering, and medicine from an understanding of  biological systems.  This capacity building is assuming importance in the present times for providing solutions to societal problems in trans-disciplinary frameworks. A major focus is on neurosciences and neurodegenerative disorders, mechanistic biology, environmental and medical microbiology, computational biology, precision health, and bioprospecting for novel molecules and bio-actives from natural resources of the Thar ecoregion. We also offer a competitive Ph.D. program to inculcate scientific temper, independent thinking, and skillsets for scientific entrepreneurship. We encourage and provide avenues for the participation of bioengineering graduates with diverse engineering disciplines to develop technologies for:

Affordable and Smart Healthcare
Clean Environment
Precision Medicine and Health
Sustainable and Affordable Energy
Faculties at the department with wide-ranging expertise,  conduct fundamental and translational research in focus areas that are contemporary and aligned to major sustainable development goals. We are passionate about research and actively communicate our science through regular outreach programs.

B.Tech. Programmes at IIT Jodhpur
IIT Jodhpur offers eight B.Tech. Programmes, namely,

 	1. B.Tech. (Bioscience & Bioengineering)	 
 	2. B.Tech. (Computer Science & Engineering)	 
 	3. B.Tech. (Electrical Engineering)	 
 	4. B.Tech. (Mechanical Engineering)	 
 	5. B.Tech. (AI and Data Science)	 
 	6. B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering)	 
 	7. B.Tech. (Materials Engineering)	 
 	8. B.Tech. (Civil and Infrastructure Engineering)	 
 	9. B.Tech. (Electronics Engineering)	 
 	 	 
 
For details of Curriculum please visit the page and Program Structure click here .

 
UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES OF IITJ: CURRICULUM FOR A GLOBAL ENGINEER
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur is committed to educational excellence through a strong student-focused educational experience and to provide quality education with the contemporary and highly professional curricula. In order to achieve this objective, IIT Jodhpur has undergone thorough curriculum change in the year 2019 and came up with a new curriculum. This article highlights philosophy ingrained in the new curriculum and some salient features.
 
The societal challenges of the 21st century are profound and wide-ranging. Basic needs such as energy, food and water, housing, mobility, and health will become even more acute as the world population exceeds 9 billion. The demands for sustainable development will require redefined and innovative engineering talent and leadership. The emergence of a connected, competitive, and entrepreneurial global economy, in which successful engineers increasingly need technical competency and professional skills that differ from what worked in the past. These reasons build up a clear case for disruptive revision of the undergraduate curriculum.
 
Some of the attributes expected of modern engineers are:
 1.	 Flexibility to understand and manage rapidly evolving technologies;
 2. 	 Ability to identify, define as well as solve problems;
 3. 	 Proficiency in theory and applications;
 4. 	 Skill for handling out-of-the-box engineering challenges;
 5. 	 Capable of Creative Thinking;
 6. 	 Experience of entrepreneurship;
 7. 	 Understanding of public policy implications.
 	 
Today the creative function of engineering is expected to be viewed and understood in the broader context of the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities and social sciences, arts and engineering. IIT Jodhpur has pursued a newer structure of programmes in addition to classical programmes to address these opportunities.

Objectives

The objective of the new curriculum is to define a novel instructional paradigm and content plan to address modern demands of professional education (as outlined above) based upon the philosophy of outcome-based education. The curriculum builds on four guiding principles of outcome-based academic, i.e., 

 1.	 All students can learn and succeed but maybe not on the same day or in the same way  

 2.	 Each success by a student breeds more success (success must open up the opportunity of more success)

 3.	 Academic institutions create and nurture the conditions of success

 4.	 The academic system acknowledges and respects challenging initiatives without fear of failure.

 

Unique features of the UG curriculum

Unique features of the undergraduate curriculum are highlighted next:

The curriculum emphasized the fundamentals of basic and engineering sciences to enable learners to have a broader multi-disciplinary perspective for the specialisation being pursued. Departmental courses focus on fundamental scientific principles behind technologies.
Avenues created for pursuing co-curricular and extra-curricular creative interests as an integral component of the curricular content by introducing nongraded courses on social connect, performing arts, and communication skills. As an outcome of these pursuits, a student is expected to improve their capacity to imagine and to build up enthusiasm to pursue unknown territories through purely creative ventures.


Early design courses are introduced which focus more heavily on conceptual design methods and less on discipline-specific artefacts. These courses teach that design is open-ended; that there are numerous engineering challenges beyond domains of traditional disciplines, and that students could begin to think and work like engineers.
Avenues created for making students continuously engaged in these intellectual processes throughout the curriculum and at an increasingly sophisticated level through design credits. Such continual integrative experiences help students to expand and deepen their “internal knowledge structure” of the discipline, which will aid their eventual retrieval and use. 
Opportunities and challenges continue to require engineers to literally invent the future by developing breakthrough technologies that solve global problems and enhance the quality of life. Entrepreneurship education has been introduced in the curriculum as a minor which gives them solid experience in product design and development, prototyping, technology trends, and market analysis


Options of Department Area Specialisation and five-year B.Tech.+M.Tech. allows students to pursue in-depth study of the topics of interest belonging to the programme. Department Area Specialization in Engineering Innovation has also been introduced with the aim of making students Industry Ready by offering five months Practical Project jointly with an Industry or R & D organization. Students get real-world experience working for an industry or R & D organization on a project that complements their academic experience.
With the rapid change in the contours of engineering education due to emergence of Miniaturization, Parallelism, Smart Materials, Bio-mimetic Systems, AI and Cognitive Systems, the role of engineering institute is not only preparing students in their major areas of study but also on other skills to encourage interdisciplinary teams to address challenges faced by the society. The emphasis has been laid on the development of technical skills in interdisciplinary areas and upcoming fields by introducing various Interdisciplinary specializations such as AI, CPS, IoT, Robotics, Smart Healthcare, etc.
With evolving patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines and obliterating traditional boundaries between science and engineering, a capability linked Double B.Tech. with second degree in Engineering Science is introduced to pursue newer structures of programmes in addition to classical programmes to provide ability to apply diverse knowledge and skills flexibly in novel situations.


 With changing paradigms of Evaluation and Assessment, the performance of students in a course is evaluated not only thorough examinations but also on a continuous basis which include but not limited to interaction in the classroom interaction, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. Technology-enabled aids have been assimilated into continuation evaluation as an integrated component. 


The finer granularity in grading has been introduced to allow for more precise and fairer grading, provide a more reliable indication of student performance, and give students a better opportunity to improve their grades.
Throughout the curriculum Efforts have been laid down at building up Strong Foundation, Enabling Continuous Learning, Inter-disciplinary Breadth, Design Thinking, Imbibing Creative and Critical Thinking, Social Responsibility and Professional Ethics, and Sustainability as distinct thematic Commitment.
Introduction
[Back to index]
The vision of the Department of Physics is to become a globally renowned Academic Hub of Physics for Quality Education, excellence in Scientific Research and Technology Innovation with High Societal and Strategic Impact by excelling in fundamental knowledge and applications of Physics blended with Engineering through curricular and co-curricular activities. In line with this vision, the Department offers an undergraduate program in Physics to attract highly motivated students interested in basic science and cutting-edge technologies in the broad discipline of physics blended with engineering, and wish for a flexible program to consider a variety of challenging career paths through capability-linked specializations in Energy, Photonics and Quantum Technologies.

One of the key salient features of the BS Physics program at the IIT Jodhpur is that the curriculum offers enormous flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The Department’s core specializations are designed to enable students to lead future technological innovations addressing the emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of Energy, Photonics and Quantum Technologies. The students can choose any of the specializations mentioned above depending on their interests. The in-depth understanding of the concepts and technical skills acquired through these program specializations will enable graduates to play a vital role in advancing the technologies such as Flexible Electronics, Green Energy, Terahertz Technology/Communications, Quantum Communications, Smart Energy for smart cities/distributed applications in rural/remote areas, and Smart Healthcare, etc.

Another distinct feature of the program is the provision for minors in Entrepreneurship. This unique feature will allow students to pursue diverse and challenging career options. The curriculum also offers numerous options that enable students to gain industrial experience through collaborative industrial projects at industries and entrepreneurship experience at the Institute’s Incubation Center.

Objectives of the program
[Back to index]
An academic path to enter the graduate program, conduct basic and application-oriented advanced scientific research with a broad range of applications, and eventually pursue research or academic profession.

An industrial path to take up the role of a technical leader through lifelong learning.
An entrepreneurial path to apply the acquired knowledge to develop new products and initiate a Deep Tech Start-up Company.
Expected Graduate Attributes
[Back to index]
The Graduates of the UG program in Physics are expected to have the following attributes:

Strong foundations of fundamental as well as applied concepts of physics enabling to excel in physics driven technologies.
Ability to acquire new knowledge of physics and integrate with engineering concepts to create new and innovative technologies for current and future applications.
Ability to apply critical scientific thinking and engineering skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems encountered in applied areas blended with engineering practices.
Ability to apply principles of physics in the domain of Energy materials and devices with a focus on generation, storage and management.
Ability to engage and actively participate in the upcoming areas of Quantum Information and related research domains of Quantum Technologies.
Preparedness to participate in future technological developments in photonics and optical communications beyond 5G including Terahertz technology.
Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments in the broad context of fundamental and applied physics blended with engineering skills.
They will be aware of ethical issues, societal needs, and problems and conduct themselves as responsible professionals.
Learning Outcomes
[Back to index]
The Graduates of the UG program in Physics will be able:

To acquire knowledge of fundamental and applied physics principles along with the required understanding of computing, mathematics, and engineering.
To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and fundamental physics tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory exercises and design projects.
To apply the concepts of mathematics, physics including Quantum technologies and advanced computing tools, to design complex engineering systems containing hardware and software (including Quantum algorithms) modules.
To acquire knowledge of fundamental and advanced concepts of Photonics and Teraherz technologies for communications, devices towards medical applications, sensing, quantum technologies, spectroscopy and imaging.
To gain an in-depth understanding of concepts of materials and devices for energy generation and storage, integration of energy sub-systems and next generation communications.
To perform a critical literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.
To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.
To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively.
To develop an attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities.
New skill sets targeted
[Back to index]
Physics BS students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs-from everyday common know-how to critical problems in different inter/multi-disciplinary domains using the fundamental and applied physics knowledge blended for present and future complex issues/challenges. The acquired knowledge will be helpful in future technologies, including:

Quantum technologies for future Quantum communication and computation
Terahertz optics, optical fiber communication and photonics for 5G and beyond communications
Next generation energy materials and devices.
Entrepreneurship
Proposed Specialization Areas
[Back to index]
Advanced Energy Materials
Photonics
Quantum Technologies
Entrepreneurship
Introduction
[Back to index]

Vision of the Department of Chemistry is to achieve academic excellence and be acknowledged for high quality fundamental, sustainable, and translational research in chemical sciences and allied research areas that addresses continuously evolving current global issues on energy, food, water, and healthcare. Along this line, the department has initiated an engineering-linked four-year undergraduate Bachelor of Science (BS) in chemistry program with specialization in a focused area to attract and foster young and aspiring minds who are driven by curiosity and interested in cutting-edge research and technologies across the disciplines of chemical science. The central theme of this program is science-based engineering innovation and through this undergraduate programme in chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, we are striving to cross the barrier of traditional paths and planning to establish ourselves to become a leading department at the interplay of science and technology. This uniquely blended program is along the line of National Education Policy, as well as the Institute’s vision of holistic development of students.

This undergraduate program is designed to transmit fundamental knowledge in basic science and engineering during the first few semesters, which develops critical analytical thinking and forms the basis of diverse skill sets used by scientists and engineers to innovate, design, and develop technologies for the future. Students undergo comprehensive training in advanced concepts of chemistry for the next two years. The inclusion of a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering departments makes the program quite interdisciplinary in nature. The final year of the curriculum is designed towards specialization in a focused area. The flexibility of opting for different specializations is ingrained in formulating the structure and curriculum of the programme. During this year, the students get to experience the joys and rigors of original research currently being pursued and consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their choice. In the specialization, emphasis is given to the emerging areas in Chemistry to meet societal and industrial needs, and ever-growing sustainability demands. The graduating students of this program shall be equipped with requisite skill-sets required to assume leadership positions in the different sectors of industry, further their career in higher studies, or embark on entrepreneurial ventures to address present day unmet challenges of the country.

Objectives of the program
[Back to index]

The objectives of this program are:

to equip new generation aspiring minds with engineering linked chemical science skill sets enabling them to opt for challenging career paths at various levels of academia and industry;
to impart education towards understanding of the concepts of chemical science, basic engineering, and allied areas enabling the students to tackle societal problems through an interdisciplinary approach;
to integrate analytical and computational abilities with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional science practices;
to facilitate and promote entry into research at an early stage through a flexible and borderless curriculum;
to inculcate an attitude towards commitment to scientific ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship, and professional development for the future generation;
to instil the approach of collaborative research between academia and industry targeting sustainability.
Expected Graduate Attributes
[Back to index]

Graduates of the program are expected to have following attributes:

Strong understanding of fundamentals of science and engineering with emphasis on chemical science.
A strong foundation in the analytical, experimental, and computational methods to study various aspects of chemical science.
Foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse cross-disciplines.
Ability to acquire new knowledge, integrate in the existing paradigm, and innovate solutions as per the requirement.
Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for the development of important chemical products such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics, etc.
Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumentation methods for interdisciplinary research areas.
Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials.
Ability to comprehend, write, and present scientific articles and technical reports.
Ability to engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.
Learning Outcomes
[Back to index]

Acquire strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry as well as other branches of basic science and engineering. 
Apply the concepts of science and basic engineering to analyse and design complex novel materials, and molecular complexes having potential applications to society.
Develop skills on hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling to tackle scientific problems.
Perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.
Develop communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars and workshops on manuscript / patent writing / presentation skills.
Value of team work and group discussion in problem solving, and time management to continue co-curricular activities without compromising academics.
To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.
New skill sets targeted
[Back to index]

Industry-R&D-Academia collaboration on cutting edge science and technologies is the key for the growth of the country. Hence students need to delve into domains ranging from sustainable materials synthesis to molecular complex design, computational chemistry, organic synthesis for pharmaceuticals, agriculture
industries to industrial Catalysis that are critical to meet future needs. In the pursuit of novel materials, molecules and catalysts relevant for today’s Circular Chemistry (Recycle and Reuse, rather than take-make-dispose) that enables a circular economy requires comprehensive understanding of the specialization areas.

Proposed Specialization Areas
[Back to index]

Spectroscopy and Dynamics
Computational Chemistry
Catalysis & Synthesis
Advanced Energy Materials
Entrepreneurship
ntroduction
The Department of Chemistry hosts a two-year M.Sc. Chemistry   (Download file 1033 KB) Program in Chemistry. The primary objective of M.Sc. Chemistry program at IIT Jodhpur is to bring out professionals with the fundamental knowledge and skill sets of various aspects of Chemistry. The program comprises a strong collection of courses spanning among organic, inorganic, physical, and theoretical chemistry with associated laboratory and hands-on sessions to provide practical knowledge. As part of the M.Sc. program, students carry out one major and one minor research project under the guidance of the faculty members of the department to get an exposure to the modern research going on in various subdomains of chemistry.

Post-Graduate-Program



Objective of the Programme
The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemistry such as Organic Reactions and their Mechanism, Main-Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry. The department focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various levels of academics, R&Ds and industries.

Expected Graduate Attributes
Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical products such as pharmaceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics etc
Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical processes for product development
Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental methods for interdisciplinary research areas
Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials
Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports
Develop oral and written communication skills
Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual integrity
Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team


Learning Outcomes
Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry
Develop appreciation of hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to address technological challenges in various domains
Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry
Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration
Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem solving skills
Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research areas related to science and technology
Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas
 

Doctoral Programs
M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree CSE & M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree AI
IIT Jodhpur has been offering MTech-PhD dual-degree programs since July 2019. These programs have been designed particularly for students with an inclination for research. Students who have completed their B.Tech. are eligible to join this program. Students complete their M.Tech. course work and then start their research, and earn both M.Tech. and Ph.D. degrees - at the end of the program. There are two distinct aspects of these programs: first, it provides an avenue for students to earn both degrees in a far lesser duration compared to if these were done individually, and second, students are awarded a fellowship equivalent to that of a JRF from the date of their joining. Academically, these programs facilitate students to decide upon their area of research by the end of the first semester. After a phase of rigorous coursework in the first two years, they start working towards the academic requirements of a PhD that includes a comprehensive exam, state-of-the-art seminar, publications in top conferences and journals, and a thesis. The students can also work on industry projects and collaborate with faculty from other academic/research bodies. This program offers the benefit of PhD level scholarship from the first year itself and the integrated courses and research helps in reducing the overall time of completing MTech and PhD.

The Department of CSE is currently offering two such programs: MTech-PhD Dual-degree in CSE and MTech-PhD Dual-degree in AI, and is continuously looking for motivated and capable students to conduct advanced research in all areas of Computer Science and AI (please visit the "Research" page for more details). The coursework requirements of these programs are similar to the corresponding MTech programs, and other support (travel support, institute mobility grant, fellowship schemes in addition to that from the Ministry of Education, etc.) and research related academic requirements are similar to the PhD program.

 Revised curriculum for Dual Degree  (Download file: 441 KB) (AY 2022 Onwards)

 Detailed curriculum for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree CSE  (Download file: 114 KB)

 Detailed curriculum for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree AI  (Download file: 119 KB)

 Detailed curriculum for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree CSE  (Download file: 58 KB) (AY 2021 Onwards)

 Detailed curriculum for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree AI  (Download file: 55.6 KB)(AY 2021 Onwards)

 Details of courses offered by Dept. CSE  (Download file: 908 KB)

 Regulations for Postgraduate Programs  (Download file: 536 KB)

Ph.D. CSE
The Ph.D. program at the Department of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is postgraduate-research-oriented. A Ph.D. student works in an area of his/her interest under the supervision of a faculty member(s) and also has the flexibility to have an industry expert as co-supervisor. The student has to complete the Ph.D. qualifier requirements, which involve a minimum number of credits by taking courses, a comprehensive exam, state-of-the-art seminar, and research proposal defense. The doctoral program’s salient feature is the independent research work taken by scholars, leading to a thesis at the end of the program. The average duration of a PhD. program is between four to five years.

The CSE department invites students with a "research" bent of mind to apply for admission to the Ph.D. program. The Ph.D. applicant must have high aspiration and willingness to work on socially relevant cutting-edge problems. The department expects that an aspirant has strong foundations in core Computer science subjects. The department offers admission to the Ph.D. program in categories like Full-Time, Part-Time.

Ph.D. Tracks

MoE Funded Ph.D.
Ph.D. Funded by Exciting Projects
Joint Ph.D. (JPD) With SUNY Buffalo (UB)
Broad Research Areas

AI & ML
CV, AR-VR
Systems & S/W
Theoretical Computer Science
Some Specific Areas of Interest Include: Health Informatics; Social Network Analysis; Cryptography; Computational Social Choice Theory; Parameterized & Randomized Algorithms; Graph Algorithms; Natural Language Understanding; Quantum Computation; VANET; Internet of Things (IoT); Blockchain; Network Security…

 Our Research Areas and Labs

Compute Facilities & Coursework

Industry focused & research-driven courses
Industry-supported labs
Modern high-end GPU clusters including NVIDIA DGX A100, DPU coming
State-Of-The-Art testbeds in VANET
Samsung sponsored AR-VR lab
Opportunity to attend courses from adjunct and visiting faculties from industries and top universities in India and abroad
Research Opportunities

Industry-sponsored projects (Meta, IBM, TCS, DRDO, Microsoft, Accenture)
Projects with government agencies on real-world problems (DRDO, AIIMS, PGI, Law Enforcement)
Close collaborations with iHub Drishti – a Technology Innovation Hub focused on “Computer Vision, AR & VR”
Joint projects with IMSc, IIT Bombay, IIT Kharagpur, IIIT Guwahati, IIT Delhi, IIIT Hyderabad, IISc Bangalore, SUNY Buffalo, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Missouri University of Science and Technology, IIT Hyderabad, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Publications at top venues
Support for attending conferences
Student reading groups and webinars by leading experts
Alumni

Our alumni are at different places in industry & academia: Charles University, State University of Texas, American Express, Czech Technical University in Prague, IIT Roorkee

 Regulations for Doctoral Programs  (Download file: 536 KB)

 Details of courses offered by the Department CSE  (Download file: 908 KB)

 Apply for admission

 Details of comprehensive papers  (Download file: 146 KB)

Joint Ph.D. (JPD) with SUNY Buffalo (UB)
Requirements

Students interested in being admitted into the JPD need to be first selected into the full-time PhD program in CSE at either Institution as per selection procedures of that Institution.
JPD selection procedures will be initiated within 6-12 months of the student enrolling in the PhD program. Students selected into the JPD program shall be enrolled on a full-time basis at both Institutions.
Before the student matriculates to UB - as a part of the residency requirement the student must fulfill UB’s minimum academic admission conditions
UB’s required minimum score in English for language proficiency requirements (i.e. TOEFL, IELTS, PTE, CPE, CAE or DET)
GATE (or equivalent as specified by MoE, Govt. of India) from India is mandatory.
While the program specifically admits exceptional students following their completion of an appropriate Bachelor’s degree, it will also admit those who will have completed an appropriate Master’s degree.
Features

Dissertation will be jointly directed by faculty from both institutions
Students will be awarded two separate PhD degrees, one from each institution
Students will need to spend approximately equal time at each institution
When in residence at UB, scholarship will cover tuition costs and a living allowance (stipend)
When in residence at IITJ, scholarship will be at par with PhD students at IITJ
When enrolled as a full-time PhD student at UB, all broad-based fees will be waived off. Covered fees include comprehensive fee, academic excellence and success fee, student activity fee, and international student fee (wherever applicable)
Students will have access to funding for research costs from the laboratory where research is being conducted
All Research Highlights

 Search...
Sr. No.	Description
1	Dr. Suraj Srivastava, Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, became a Fellow of The Institution of Electronics & Telecommunication Engineers (IETE) - FIETE
2	Imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method
3	Structure and exfoliation mechanism of two-dimensional boron nanosheets
4	2D Materials for Potable Water Application: Basic Nanoarchitectonics and Recent Progresses
5	Research paper published by Dr. Sushmita Jha in Scientific Reports
6	Language Independent Speech Generation System
7	A Novel Multipath Mitigation Technique for GNSS Signals in Urban Scenarios
8	Rajasthani Clay Catalytic Converters for Automobiles
9	Optical Field Design for Solar Thermal Applications

Amit Kumar Mishra

Professor Amit Kumar Mishra currently serves as the Head of the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He holds an M.Sc. in Biotechnology with Honours from Devi Ahilya University, Indore. He pursued his doctoral studies in Neuroscience at the Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience Unit under the mentorship of Professor Nihar Ranjan Jana at the National Brain Research Centre, India. He was awarded the prestigious Max Planck Society Fellowship by Professor Ulrich Hartl (Director of Max Planck Institute, Germany). In addition, he received a highly competitive RIKEN Brain Science Institute Fellowship from the Presidents of RIKEN BSI, Japan, Professor Masao Ito and Professor Shunichi Amari. Prof. Mishra has pioneered a significant conceptual advancement in the field of protein homeostasis by identifying selective E3 ubiquitin ligases as key regulators in cellular quality control mechanisms. His research demonstrates that these ligases act as a first line of defense and ameliorative agents against proteostasis failures, which are central to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases and imperfect aging. His outstanding contributions to the field have been recognized through numerous prestigious national awards, including honors from INSA, NASI, ISCA, NAMS, IAN, and DBT. He has also received significant international recognition for his work. The New York Academy of Sciences, with members from over 100 countries around the globe, has recognized Amit’s Profile for exceptional research in Neurodegeneration. With over 135 high-impact publications in esteemed international journals, Prof. Mishra has established himself as a leading figure in the field of neurobiology. His research not only advances the fundamental understanding of proteostasis mechanisms but also holds significant promise for the development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting neurodegenerative disorders.

Meenu Chhabra

Prof. Meenu Chhabra is a Professor of Bioscience and Bioengineering, and her research is focused on Environmental Biotechnology. Her group work on Algae carbon capture cells, Microbial Fuel Cells, Biomass to Bioenergy, Bioremediation and Biomonitoring. She has a background in Microbiology, with specific training and expertise in enzyme-based bioremediation, bioprocess development, and wastewater treatment. As PI or co-Investigator on several GOI funded grants, She laid the groundwork for the utilizing bio-electrochemical systems for radionuclide bioremediation, algae based microbial capture cells for bioenergy and water treatment, plant microbial fuel cells for domestic wastewater treatment,  Bioremediation of xenobiotics and heavy metals and Point-of-Use sensors for BOD and coliforms.  In addition, She successfully administered the projects, collaborated with other researchers, and produced several peer-reviewed publications from each project. Currently, the group is discussing and demonstrating the work to Industry stakeholders for bench to field applications of our work.  In summary, the lab has expertise, leadership, training, and motivation necessary to successfully carry out work on carbon neutrality, zero waste, zero water, and circular bioeconomy.

Email:meenuchhabra@iitj.ac.in; Phone: +91-291-2801205

Mitali Mukerji

Dr. Mitali Mukerji, PhD, FASc, FNASc is a Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur and is affiliated with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE) and Centre for Emerging Technologies for Sustainable Development. . She earned her PhD in microbial molecular genetics from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore in 1997.  Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur in 2021, she served as Chief Scientist at the CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, where she led the Genomics and Molecular Medicine department and CSIR’s Ayurgenomics unit TRISUTRA. She has contributed to research  human genomics with a focus on rare diseases and functional genomics of Alu repeats, biomarker discovery for disease susceptibility, environmental adaptations, and tracing mutational histories. She pioneered the field of Ayurgenomics, that integrates Ayurveda with modern genomics for personalized and integrative medicine, and was the convenor of  the Indian Genome Variation Consortium (IGVC), which provided the first comprehensive genetic landscape of Indian populations.

At IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Mukerji leads two major transdisciplinary initiatives: Thar DESIGNS, which explores human adaptation and ecosystem phenomics in the Thar Desert using multi-omic technologies including  population genomics, citizen science and ecology; and AYURTECH Centre of Excellence Centre of Excellence in Integrative Precision Health at AIDE school that builds AI enabled frameworks for early, actionable health interventions. through integration of principles and practices of Ayurveda with genomics and engineering sciences   for  evidence-based solutions.  

Dr. Mukerji’s contributions have been recognized with several prestigious honors, including the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Award in Medical Sciences, election as Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Sciences, India, DBT Young Women scientist award, the VASVIK Award for Women Scientists, and Global WomenLift Health fellow.


 Surajit Ghosh

Surajit Ghosh is a Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. He is leading his group with a current research focus on the areas of Chemical Neuroscience, Chemical Biology and Development of Biophysical Platform/Biosensor. 

He earned his Bachelor’s and Master’s degree in Chemistry from University of Calcutta. In 2008, he received his PhD in Chemistry from IIT Kanpur. After completing his Ph. D., he received postdoctoral fellowship at Cell Biology and Biophysics Division of European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, where he worked on organization of microtubule and molecular motor proteins. Prior to Joining at IIT Jodhpur, he worked at CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology Kolkata as Principal Scientist.

Sushmita Jha

Sushmita Jha is a Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. During her PhD at the Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Prof Jha elucidated a novel pathway for inflammation and demyelination in the brain.  She pursued Postdoctoral research at the UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Care (USA), characterising cellular and molecular mechanisms of demyelination in Multiple Sclerosis. 

Subsequently, Prof Jha joined IIT Jodhpur in 2012. At IIT Jodhpur, she established the Inflammation Immunity and Tumour Biology Lab. This lab focuses on understanding innate immunity, inflammation, and tumour biology utilising cellular and molecular 3-Dimensional (3D) models such as patient-derived organoids and 3D tunable spheroids to study brain tumours and breast cancer pathophysiology as well as normal physiology. Prof Jha's laboratory has been funded by the Department of Biotechnology, International Brain Research Organization (IBRO), Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MEITy), SERB, and BRNS (DAE). 

Prof Jha is the recipient of the IITJ Research Excellence Award 2024, IBRO Diversity grant 2023, ISNO President’s Award for Outstanding Work in Neuro-Oncology by the Indian Society for Neuro-Oncology (2022), The Kusum Sharma Award for a Young Woman Scientist awarded by the Indian Academy of Biomedical Sciences (2021), Young scientist Award, (2014-2017) Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), and the Hulka Innovator’s Award (2008) Centre for women’s health research at University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, USA.

Prof Jha is the founding Head of the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IITJ and has been heading the joint programs in medical technologies between IITJ and AIIMSJ since 2020, as well as the MedTech Centre at IITJ. 

Email:sushmitajha@iitj.ac.in, Phone: +91-291-280-1204

Website: www.sushmitajhalab.com 


 Indranil Banerjee

Dr. Indranil Banerjee is an associate professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur. Dr. Banerjee has extensive research experience in tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, biomaterials, therapeutic delivery systems and biomicrofludics. Presently, his lab is working on AI-guided 3D bioprinted diseses model for in vitro drug screening, 3D printed craniofacial implants, NIR-responsive phototherapeutics for chronic wound healing, and Proangiogenic 2D biomaterials.  

Dr. Banerjee has an interdisciplinary academic and research background. He did his double bachelor's (B.Sc in  Chemistry (Hons) and B.Tech in Chemical Technology) and Master's (M.Tech. in Pharmaceutical and Fine Chemical Technology) from the University of Calcutta. Later, he pursued his PhD in Biotechnology from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He started his academic career as an assistant professor in the Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering, National Institute of Technology Rourkela. He has authored around 100 research articles and book chapters and edited several books. He received the Institute Award for Research Excellence -2022; Senior Researcher Award (Engineer
Raviraj Vankayala

Dr. Raviraj Vankayala is an Associate Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India, where his research involves the development of multifunctional nanostructures for diagnostic and therapeutic applications in tackling various diseases. Dr. Vankayala completed his  B. Sc and M. Sc in Chemistry from Andhra University, Visakhapatnam. He earned his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from National Tsing Hua University (2012), Taiwan and his postdoctoral studies were performed at National Tsing Hua University (2015) and University of California Riverside (2017), USA. He worked as a Chief Technology Officer at Radoptics LLC (2017-2019) for the development of biomimetic nanoconstructs for imaging and therapeutic applications of cancer and vascular diseases. He has secured an Outstanding Researcher Award for his contributions in the field of Nanobiotechnology by IIT Jodhpur for the year 2021. He also secured the prestigious DBT Ramalingaswami biomedical fellowship for the year 2018-2019. He served as a Guest Editor for various special issues in the MDPI and Frontiers journals. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor for Frontiers in Drug Delivery journal and as an editorial board member for the Scientific Reports (Nature Publishing Group) and Particle (John Wiley & Sons) journals. He has secured the prestigious 2024 Rising Stars in Biological, Medicinal, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry by the American Chemical Society.
About:

Dr. Deepak Swami is an Associate Professor in the  Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering,  Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. 

Educational Background:

Dr. Swami completed his Ph.D. at the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, specializing in groundwater flow and contamination modeling, surface moisture dynamics, and geoenvironmental engineering.

Professional Experience:

Associate Professor at IIT Mandi (February 2015 - March 2025): Dr. Swami served as an Associate Professor at IIT Mandi for over a decade, contributing significantly to the field of water resources engineering. ​

Associate Professor at IIT Jodhpur (March 2025 - Present): In March 2025, Dr. Swami joined IIT Jodhpur as an Associate Professor in the Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, bringing his extensive experience in water resources engineering to the institution. 

Research Interests and Contributions:

Dr. Swami is a water resources engineer and he focuses on process level investigation of groundwater flow and contaminant transport through aquifers. His research interests include parameter optimization, aquifer scale modeling, dynamic plant uptake, source identification and application of one health. .

Academic Contributions:

Throughout his academic career, Dr. Swami has been actively involved in research and consultancy projects, contributing to the advancement of knowledge in his field. His expertise has been instrumental in shaping the curriculum and research initiatives at both IIT Mandi and IIT Jodhpur.​

Professional Engagements:

Dr. Swami has organized and participated in various workshops and conferences. Notably, he was involved in the HYDRUS Winter School held from January 27-31, 2024, aimed at educating participants on the use of HYDRUS software for research and consultancy purposes.


Dr. Swami's transition to IIT Jodhpur marks a significant step in his career, where he continues to contribute to the field of civil and infrastructure engineering through his teaching, research, and professional activities.
About:

Dr. Ranju Mohan is an Associate Professor in the Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. She received her Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras and worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow at CiSTUP, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore. Her primary research interests include heterogeneous traffic flow theory and modeling, modeling connected and autonomous vehicle interactions, and dynamic traffic assignment in a multi-vehicle class scenario.

Transportation System and Traffic Modelling (TSTM) Lab

TSTM lab addresses Transportation system necessities and requirements that evolve from  urban sprawl, technological advancement, and changing societal demand.  The lab primarily focuses on traffic flow modelling and simulation, accident analysis and prevention, public transport prioritization, transportation policy analysis,  and traffic management solutions. Visit the lab here TSTM LAB

Research positions open

Research positions are available in the field of Mixed traffic flow modelling, Autonomous driving, Multi-modal integrated transport, and Vehicle trajectory analysis for traffic safety and flow modelling. Email your CV to ranju@iitj.ac.in
About:

Dr. Raychoudhury, an Associate Professor in the Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. She has a wide range of experience in water quality, remediation, and management related issues, starting from laboratory experiment to numerical modelling to real-field scenario. Prior to joining to IIT Jodhpur she was working as an Assistant Professor (2015-2021) in IIT Patna and BITS-Pilani Hyderabad (2014-2015). 

After her M.Tech. (2005) from IIT Kanpur, she joined International Water Management Institute (IWMI)-Tata, as a Research Consultant (2005-2007). During her stay at IWMI-Tata she got wide exposure about real-field scenario on water quality related issues. Her research during Ph.D. (2011) at McGill University, Canada, and PostDoc at Technische Universitat Berlin (2012-2014), Germany was mainly focused on the application of advanced nanoparticle-based techniques for water quality control.

Her research motivation is towards linking the real-field water contamination issues with the laboratory based advanced solution. Furthermore, she believes that it is equally important to investigate the possible environmental implication of any novel technology before adopting it. She leads the group in the same direction towards achieving a more sustainable solution for the water quality sector.
About:

Dr. Aali Pant is an Assistant Professor in Geotechnical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. Her research focuses on geoenvironmental engineering, reinforced soil structures, geosynthetics applications, and AI/ML in geotechnical engineering.

She holds a Ph.D. from IIT Delhi (2020), an M.Tech. from IIT Roorkee (2013), and a B.Tech. from G.B.P.U.A & T, Pantnagar (2011). Before joining IIT Jodhpur in 2022, she worked as an Assistant Professor at Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Delhi, a Research Associate at IIT Delhi, and a Geotechnical Engineer at Cengrs Geotechnica. She has also contributed to major consultancy projects on Ash Dyke feasibility and design for NTPC.

Dr. Pant has received several awards, including the Tara Chand Kanti Devi Prize (IIT Roorkee), ISSMGE Foundation Award, Research Excellence Travel Award (IIT Delhi), and the Sumant Sinha-Sustainability Leadership Award. She was also featured among the 75 Influential Indian Women in Geotechnical Engineering (2023).


She is a member of IGS, ISSMGE, and ASCE and teaches courses on Geotechnical Engineering, AI/ML in Civil Engineering, and Ground Improvement Techniques. Her research contributes to sustainable geotechnical solutions and emerging technologies in civil engineering.    
About:

Dr. Amit Sharma is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. His specialization lies in environmental engineering, with a specific focus on air pollution. His research involves weather forecasting, climate modeling, and air pollution studies using complex model simulations on supercomputers. This work is supplemented by comprehensive data analysis from satellites, radiosondes, and various ground-based instruments.

He has been serving as an Assistant Professor at IIT Jodhpur since July 2020. Prior to this, he worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at Washington State University, where he focused on wildfire modeling. He has also held visiting scholar positions at the University of Manchester, specializing in aerosol chemical speciation, and at the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, where he contributed to weather research and forecasting.


Dr. Sharma’s expertise and research continue to contribute to advancements in environmental engineering and air pollution studies.
About

Dr. Akshay Gupta is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. He joined the institute in July 2025.

Educational Background:
Dr. Gupta completed his Ph.D. at the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, specializing in Enhancing High-Speed Road Safety: Insights from Advanced LiDAR-Based Driver Behavior Analysis.

Research Interest
Dr. Gupta’s research interests lie in the field of transportation engineering, with a particular focus on road safety, driving behavior analysis, crash-risk prediction, and the application of emerging technologies such as LiDAR and camera-based sensing systems. His work contributes significantly to data-driven approaches in support of Vision Zero initiatives, aimed at eliminating traffic fatalities and ensuring safer, more sustainable mobility systems.
Dr. Gupta is actively engaged in interdisciplinary research and continues to collaborate with academic and industry partners to develop innovative solutions for urban transportation challenges.

Academic Contribution
Over the course of his academic career, Dr. Gupta has authored over 22 peer-reviewed publications and conference papers, with his research being cited more than 1000 times. He currently holds an h-index of 13, reflecting the impact and quality of his scholarly contributions.

students participate in sports events football cricket athletics competitions
hostel facilities include mess library internet and recreation rooms
faculty members teach courses conduct research and guide students
examinations include quizzes assignments midterm and final exams
administration manages admissions academics and student services
clubs organize cultural technical and social activities on campus
placements involve internships job offers and industry collaboration
Patents
    Gupta A., Shreyansh, Priyanshu Pansari, Choudhary P, Parida M
Dynamic severity-level real-time lane departure warning system with sparse 3D-Lidar sensor. (Patent published)

Awards and Scholarships

BEST PAPER AWARD

World Conference of Transport Research (WCTR)-15    26th to 30th May, 2019
    (Best Paper Award by Cairo University For Transport in Developing Countries)
    Gupta, A., Bivina, G.R. and Parida, M. “Measuring Impact of Objective and Subjective Built Environment Factors on Access Mode Choice to Metro Stations.” International Conference World Conference on Transport Research (WCTR)- 15 held at IIT Bombay.
Best Paper Award 2023 by the journal ‘Multimodal Transportation’
    Chauhan V., Gupta, A. and Parida, M. Do users' characteristics really influence the perceived service quality of Multimodal Transportation Hub (MMTH)? An association rules mining approach" Multimodal Transportation Journal Award 2023
Outstanding Poster Award at Institute Research Day 2024 (IIT Roorkee)
    Gupta, A., Choudhary P., Parida, M., Enhancing High-Speed Road Safety: Insights from Advanced LiDAR-Based Driver Behaviour Analysis. 
Professional Memberships

World Conference of Transport Research Society (WCTRs)
Eastern Asia Society of Transportation Studies (EASTs)
International Conference on Travel Behavior Research (IATBR)
About

 Prof. Rajpurohit is a dynamic academician and researcher adept at Renewable Energy and Power Electronics Application to Power Systems. Prof. Rajpurohit has expertise in the area of Power Electronics application to Power Systems, Future Electricity Networks, Grid Integration of Renewable Energy, and Power quality. Prof. Rajpurohit has published papers in reputed journals and conferences. He has conducted many short-term courses and workshops. He has both academic and industrial experiences with leadership quality thus, can manage academic as well as project-related activities. Prof. Rajpurohit has more than 15 years of involvement with the energy sector in various capacities: graduate-level teaching in energy, research, and industrial experience.
About

Deepak Fulwani received the Ph.D. degree in control systems from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bombay, Mumbai, India, in 2009. He was an assistant professor at IIT Guwahati, Guwahati, India, and served as a visiting faculty at IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India. He is currently a professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. He has authored or coauthored several articles in reputed international journals and conferences. His current research interests are power electronics, microgrids, and control systems. Prof. Fulwani was a guest associate editor for a special issue on structured DC microgrids for the IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics in 2017. He was an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications from 2019 to 2022. He is currently an Editorial Board Member of Nature Scientific Reports and Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics since June 2024. He was the recipient of the Excellence Award for his Ph.D. thesis work in the IDP program in Systems and Control in the 48th Convocation of IIT Bombay. He was also awreded Teaching Excellence Award (for class size 30 to 60) by IIT Jodhpur in 2020
About

Dr. Bhabani K. Satapathy is a professor in the Department of Materials Engineering. He did his Ph.D. from IIT Delhi in the area of polymer composites and specifically on the tribological aspects of composites for automotive braking applications. He subsequently pursued his research career as a Postdoctoral fellow at Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden (IPF Dresden) and in Mechanics of Functional Materials (MfM) group of Institute of Material Science and Technology at Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. He also has an M. Tech. degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from IIT Delhi. His main research interests are on phase behaviour, tribology and fracture mechanics of polymer based blends, composites, block copolymers and allied materials. 

Research Interests:

Morphology and Phase Behaviour of Block Copolymers, Polymer Blends and Composites, Micromechanics, Fracture and Fatigue of Polymer Nano-composites, Tribology of Polymer Based Materials, Biotribology, Thermo-Mechanical Behaviour of Biomaterials.
About

Dr. Jaiveer Singh is an Associate Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He is also an affiliate faculty and a Program Management Committee member of the Centre for Medical Technologies at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on microstructure and texture evolution, thermo-mechanical processing, mechanical behavior of materials, and the design and development of light alloys and biomaterials. He is also actively involved in research on additive manufacturing technologies used for patient-specific implants.

Before joining IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Singh worked as a Research Professor at Sunchon National University, Suncheon, Republic of Korea. During his tenure there, he investigated deformation and fracture mechanisms in magnesium (Mg) alloys under mini-V-bending and Erichsen testing at room temperature. He received his Ph.D. in Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science from IIT Bombay in 2015. His doctoral research focused on the microstructural and textural evolution during deformation in zirconium. To date, he has published more than 50 research articles in SCI/SCIE-indexed journals and has 5 patents filed. He also serves as a reviewer for several esteemed journals and international conferences.
Faculty Members
Search...

Bhabani K Satapathy
Professor
emailsatapathy[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1566
schoolPh.D: Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Morphology and Phase Behaviour of Block Copolymers, Polymer Blends and Composites, Micromechanics, Fracture and Fatigue of Polymer Nano-composites, Tribology of Polymer Based Materials, Biotribology, Thermo-Mechanical Behaviour of Biomaterials

Ravi K R
Professor
emailravikr[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1556
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Computational Thermodynamics for Alloy Design, Solidification Studies on light alloys, Biodegradable magnesium alloys, Self-cleaning coating

Abir Bhattacharyya
Associate Professor
emailabir[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1554
schoolPh.D.: University of Florida
Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Fatigue of Bearing Steels, High-strain rate Deformation of Materials, Indentation Response of Materials

Appala Naidu Gandi
Associate Professor
emailappalanaidu[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1555
schoolPh.D.: Imperial College, London
First-Principles Calculations, Molecular Dynamics, Thermoelectric Transport, Lattice Dynamics, Mechanical Behaviour, ab initio Characterisation

Jaiveer Singh
Associate Professor
emailjaiveer[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1521
schoolPh.D: Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
Microstructure-mechanical property correlation; Deformation and fracture mechanisms; Metal forming processes; Additive manufacturing; Thermo-mechanical processing of materials; Design and development of alloys; Mechanical behavior of materials

Saurabh Nene
Associate Professor
emailssnene[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1559
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Alloy Design, Additive Manufacturing, HIgh Entropy Alloys, Friction Stir Welding and Processing

Debasmita Dwibedi
Assistant Professor
emaildebasmitadwibedi[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
schoolPhD.: Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Battery Materials, Sodium-Ion Batteries; Electrode Materials Design; Inorganic Functional Materials; Electrochemical, Electrocatalytic, Magnetism and Electrical Conductivity Studies; Inorganic Synthesis; Crystal Structures and Correlations thereof.

Abhay Gupta
Assistant Professor
emailabhaygupta[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1568
schoolPh.D.: Materials Engineering, IISc Bangalore, 2022
Electrochemistry; proton exchange membrane water electrolysis; metallic/alloy coatings; corrosion analysis; microstructure-corrosion correlation.

Amitava Banerjee
Assistant Professor
emailamitava[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1564
schoolPh.D.: Uppsala University, Sweden
DFT, Molecular Dynamics, Crystal structures prediction, Hydrogen, and oxygen evolution reaction (HER, OER), 2D catalysts, Solar cell, 2D anodes, Battery Thermodynamics and Kinetics modeling, Defect engineering, Oxide growth

Anurag Sharma
Assistant Professor
emailanuragsharma[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1569
schoolPh.D. : Nanyang Technological University (NTU) Singapore
Advanced Composite Materials; Thermoplastic composites; Fatigue and Impact behavior of Composites; Multifunctional Composite Design; Composite Manufacturing & Processing; Structural testing; Damage mechanics & Failure analysis.

Devendra Singh Negi
Assistant Professor
emaildevendra[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1562
schoolPh.D.: JNCASR Bangalore
Experimental and computational electron microscopy; EMCD; DFT; Quantum material;Thermoelectric materials; Magnetic materials; Quantum materials

Jitendra Kumar
Assistant Professor
emailjitendrak[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1609
schoolPhD.: Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Thin-Film Photovoltaic Devices, Nanomaterials, Semiconductor Devices, Microfabrication Technologies, Materials for Energy Applications, and Flexible Electronic Devices.

Koundinya NTBN
Assistant Professor
emailkoundinya[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1558
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Sustainable metallurgy, Creep, High temperature deformation, Additive manufacturing, Light alloys

Lalit
Assistant Professor
emaillalitkaushik[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1565
schoolPh.D.: Sunchon National University, South Korea
Computational Materials Science, Crystal Plasticity Simulations, Grain Growth Simulations (Monte-Carlo Simulation & Phase Field Modeling), Machine Learning for Materials Engineering

Nitin Kumar Sharma
Assistant Professor
emailnitinksh[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1560
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Phase Transformations; Grain Boundary Engineering; Thermo-mechanical Processing; Electron Microscopy; Atom Probe Tomography; Computational Thermodynamics; Finite Element Simulation

Pranay Ranjan
Assistant Professor
emailpranay[dot]ranjan[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1563
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Patna
2D Materials: Synthesis and Applications in Sensing and Environmental Remediation

Ravi Prakash Srivastava
Assistant Professor
emailravip[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1553
schoolPh.D: Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Fabrication and characterization of solar cells, Sodium-ion Batteries, Energy Materials, Thin-films, Nanomaterials, Materials Characterization, and Structure-property correlation

Sk Md Hasan
Assistant Professor
emailhasan[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1561
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Advanced Steel Design; Phase Transformations; Deformation and Wear Behaviour of Metals/alloys; Processing-structure-performance correlations in steels.

Srijan Sengupta
Assistant Professor
emailsrijansengupta[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1557
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Lithium ion Batteries, Electrochemistry

Sumeet Rajesh Khanna
Assistant Professor
emailsumeetk[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1567
schoolPh.D.: Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru
Magnetic materials for EV, ICME (Integrated Computational Materials Engineering), AI applications in materials, CALPHAD, phase field, Alloy Design

Vikramsingh Rajendrasingh Thakur
Assistant Professor
emailvikramsinghthakur[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1570
schoolPh.D: Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
Polymer Composites Processing, High-performance, Lightweight, and Multifunctional Composites, Sustainable and Biodegradable Materials, Advanced Packaging Films & Laminates, Electrospun Nanofibrous Materials.
Important links
CCCD @ IITJ
Recruitment
Correspondence
RTI
Tenders
Techscape
Contact
Old Website
NCCR Portal
How To Reach IITJ
Institute Repository
Donations
Web Policy
Web Information Manager
Feedback
CERT-IN
Help
NIRFFaculty Members
Search...

Indranil Banerjee
Associate Professor
emailindranil[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1214
schoolTissue engineering; Regenerative medicine; Biomaterials; Theranostic systems; Biomicrofluidic
Tissue engineering; Regenerative medicine; Biomaterials; Theranostic systems; Biomicrofluidic

Jaiveer Singh
Associate Professor
emailjaiveer[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1521
schoolMicrostructure-mechanical property correlation; Deformation and fracture mechanisms;
Microstructure-mechanical property correlation; Deformation and fracture mechanisms; Metal forming processes; Additive manufacturing; Thermo-mechanical processing of materials; Design and development of alloys; Mechanical behavior of materials

Alok Ranjan
Assistant Professor
emailalok[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1414
schoolPublic Health, Universal Health Coverage, Health Systems, Health Economics
Public Health, Universal Health Coverage, Health Systems, Health Economics, Health Equity, Elderly Health, Non-Communicable Diseases, Disability & Rehabilitation

Angshuman Paul
Assistant Professor
emailapaul[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1274
schoolMedical Image Analysis; Machine Learning; Computer Vision
Medical Image Analysis; Machine Learning; Computer Vision

Bikash Santra
Assistant Professor
emailbikash[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1763
schoolComputer Vision, Machine Learning, and Medical Image Analysis
Computer Vision, Machine Learning, and Medical Image Analysis

Dweepobotee Brahma
Assistant Professor
emaildweepobotee[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1755
schoolEconometrics, Machine Learning, Development and Health Economics
Econometrics, Machine Learning, Development and Health Economics

Manu Kanchan
Assistant Professor
emailmanuk[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call+91-291-280-1822
schoolBranding, Intellectual Property - Patents, Trademarks & Competition
Branding, Intellectual Property - Patents, Trademarks & Competition

Palash Das
Assistant Professor
emailpalashdas[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1256
schoolComputer Architecture; Near-Memory Processing; Hardware Designing
Computer Architecture; Near-Memory Processing; Hardware Designing; Machine Learning Accelerators

Rajyalakshmi Garaga
Assistant Professor
emailgaraga[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1722
schoolPublic Health Related to Environment- Ambient and Indoor Air pollution
Public Health Related to Environment- Ambient and Indoor Air pollution, Health Risk Assesment, Bioaerosols, Rural Drinking Water Treatment

Sucharita Dey
Assistant Professor
emailsdey[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1218
schoolPrinciples of protein robustness to mutation, Prediction of disease mutations
Principles of protein robustness to mutation, Functional role of protein quaternary structure in mutation and disease, Prediction of disease mutations, Identifying structural determinants of inter-subunit communication -- Allostery

Suman Dhaka
Assistant Professor
emaildhakas[at]iitj[dot]ac[dot]in
call0291 280 1415
schoolBroad: Cognitive Neuroscience, Cognitive Psychology; Decision making;
Broad: Cognitive Neuroscience, Cognitive Psychology; Decision making; Sleep; Cognition; Affect Regulation
Important links
CCCD @ IITJ
Recruitment
Correspondence
RTI
Tenders
Techscape
Contact
Old Website
NCCR Portal
How To Reach IITJ
Institute Repository
Donations
Web Policy
Web Information Manager
Feedback
CERT-IN
Help
NIRF
Internal Committee
Intranet Links
IIT Jodhpur Facebook Page
IIT Jodhpur Twitter Page
IIT Jodhpur You tube Channel
IIT Jodhpur Instagram Page
IIT Jodhpur Linkedin Page
G20 India 2023
75 Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)
Vidya Lakshmi Fulfilling Educational Aspirations
National Commission for Women (NCW) Helpline
National Anti-Ragging Monitoring Agency
india.gov.in National portal of India
Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved | This Portal is Owned, Designed, and Developed by Digital Infrastructure & Automation, IIT Jodhpur.  N.H. 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar, Jodhpur - 342030, Rajasthan (India)

For any comments/enquiries/feedback, please email the WIM.

Last Updated : 23 Mar 2026 - 09:28 AM
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur was established in 2008 to foster technology education and research in India. The Institute is committed to technological thought and action to benefit the economic development of the country. Scholarship in teaching and learning, scholarship in research and creative accomplishments, and relevance to industry are the three driving forces at IIT Jodhpur.

IIT Jodhpur functions from its sprawling residential permanent campus of 852 acres on National Highway 65, north-northwest of Jodhpur towards Nagaur. This campus is meticulously planned and envisioned to stand as a symbol of academics – simple yet profound.

The Institute is committed to a multidisciplinary approach to technology development. Hence, it has established state-of-the-art laboratories for basic research and has organised its academic degree programs through departments, while coordinating research activities through Centers for Technologies.

Important links
CCCD @ IITJ
A future-driven institute for nurturing excellence of thought; creating, preserving, and imparting knowledge; and using transformational technologies/interventions with a multidisciplinary approach for responding to societal challenges and aspirations.



 Mission
Foster humanitarian values, passion for learning, and creativity in faculty and students
Move towards a high-quality, futuristic educational and research ecosystem
Develop socially responsible faculty, students, and future leaders, committed to creating a self-reliant India
Catalyze a professional internal culture, along with enabling infrastructure and ancillary services
Forge effective national as well as international collaboration and partnership with industry and academia for diverse purposes and activities.


 Goals
Curriculum: To assimilate balanced, broad-based, as well as specialized education in all curricula with opportunities for different kinds of students and their interests.
Pedagogy: To establish systems for dynamic development, implementation, and evaluation of futuristic pedagogy, including blended-hybrid teaching and experiential learning.
Research: Have a globally engaged research ecosystem with state-of-the-art facilities in place, for attaining leadership in research on academic, social, national, and industrial fronts while capitalizing on emerging and in-demand opportunities.
Outreach: To be the Institute of Choice for a lifelong learning journey of working professionals, alumni, and the community.
Institutional Collaboration: Have an efficient platform in place for forging impactful partnerships with academia, research institutes, business organizations, civil society, governments, and other agencies across the world for contributing to larger goals for humanity.
Industry Connect: Ensure ease of collaboration with industry for joint research/ projects, IPR development, technology transfer, and encouraging entrepreneurship/ startups, along with efficient supporting infrastructure and systems.
Financial Plan: Set up innovative resource mobilization mechanisms and expenditure management systems, embedded in the internal budgetary processes, to have ample resources/ funds for actualizing the institute’s vision and goals.
Infrastructure: The institute will have secure, evolving, futuristic digital and physical infrastructure and ancillary services to meet all its needs, along with knowledge infrastructure for supporting learning and enabling skill development.
Student Life Cycle: Students will find at IIT Jodhpur (i) a vibrant learning environment, with opportunities for excelling in curricular, co-curricular and extracurricular activities, (ii) an effective career development process for their successful initiation to the professions of their choice and (iii) a strong linkage with alumni through regular interactions, support for their lifelong learning and professional development; and enabling their active participation as a stakeholder in the affairs of the institute.
Agile Organization: Ensure that IITJ continues to be an agile organization for both stability and dynamism as a network of teams with a people-centric culture that operates through fast but considered decision cycles, which are enabled by technology, and guided by a powerful common purpose to co-create value for all stakeholders of the institute.
Important links
Way back in 1946, visionary leaders in the country conceived the idea of establishing Higher Technical Institutes to support post-war industrial development in India. A committee, headed by Nalini Ranjan Sarkar, recommended the establishment of these institutes in various parts of India. The first Indian Institute of Technology was founded in May 1950 at Kharagpur. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, at the first convocation of IIT Kharagpur in 1956, clarified in his address that these institutes of technology would help meet the technological challenges of the nation.

During 1959-1960, four IITs were established at Bombay, Delhi, Kanpur, and Madras. Subsequently, on 15 September 1961, the Parliament of India passed an act known as the Institutes of Technology Act, declaring IIT Kharagpur as an institute of national importance. Also, IIT Kharagpur was given the status of an autonomous university. Thereafter, IIT Guwahati started in 1994, and the then University of Roorkee was given the status of an IIT (now called IIT Roorkee) in 2001.

The establishment of eight more IITs across the country began with a decision of the Cabinet, which was announced by the Minister of Human Resource Development on 28 March 2008. IIT Bhubaneswar, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Jodhpur (earlier called IIT Rajasthan), IIT Patna, and IIT Ropar began functioning in 2008, while two others, IIT Indore and IIT Mandi, commenced their sessions in 2009.

During the past decades, since 1956, IITs have become a hallmark of quality technology undergraduate education internationally, attributed largely to the ambience of quality academics. The endeavor at IIT Jodhpur is to uphold this brand image, which has been meticulously built over the last 60 years, with a renewed focus on producing world-class, technology-driven graduates who will contribute to the nation's development.